---
package:
  name: "akkapros"
  version: "2.0.0"
pipeline: "pipeline"
step: "atfparse"
file:
  id: "f6e1bc7d-56fb-5352-81ec-22aee6598893"
  title: "L I.5 Erra and Išum SB I"
  format: "trans"
  version: "1.0.0"
  date: "2026-04-12"
metadata:
  input_file_id: null
  options:
  data:
---

King of all settlements, creator of the universe, […]!
Hendursanga, first-born son of Enlil, [...],
Bearer of the august scepter, shepherd of the black-headed people, herdsman of [@i{mankind}]!
Išum, zealous butcher whose hands are suited to bear his fierce weapons,
And at the lightning of whose wrathful spears even Erra, the warrior of the gods, trembles in (his) abode!
His heart yearned for combat;
To his weapons he exhorted, “Smear yourselves with deadly venom!”
To the Seven, peerless warriors, “Gird your arms!”
And he said to you, (Išum): “I shall head for the (battle) field!”
You alone are the torch, it is your light they look to!
You alone are the champion, the gods [@i{march behind}!]
You alone are the sword, the butcher […]!
Should Erra arise, when he destroys the country,
Your mind will not rejoice, your heart will not be joyous.
Erra, like a sleepless man, his limbs are weary,
To his heart he said: “Shall I arise? Or shall I sleep on?”
To his weapons he exhorted, “Keep leaning on the corners!”
To the Seven, peerless warriors, “Return to your abode!”.
Until you should wake him, he is asleep in his bed,
Together with Mami, his wife, he revels.
O Engidudu, lord who wanders in the night, who guides the princes,
Who leads safely lad and girl, illuminating (them) like the light of day!
The divinity of the Seven, peerless warriors, is quite another:
Their origin is strange; they are charged with terror;
Whoever looks at them is paralyzed with fear: their breath is death,
People are terrified and dare not approach it.
Išum is a door: before them it is barred.
Anu, the king of the gods, impregnated Earth,
It bore him seven gods, whom he named “the Seven”.
These stood before him as he assigned them their functions.
He summoned the first and gave him orders:
“Wherever you go in your rage — you shall have no rival!”
He said to the second: “Burn like fire and blaze like a flame!”
He exhorted the third: “Let your face be that of a lion so that whoever beholds you melts down!”
He said to the fourth: “May the mountain be destroyed at the attack of your fiery weapons!”
And then to the fifth he said: “Blow like the wind and overwhelm the world!”
To the sixth he commanded: “sweep over above and below, sparing no one!”
The seventh he filled with viper’s venom: “Finish (all) life!”.
Once Anu had fixed the lot of all Seven,
He handed them over to Erra, the warrior of the gods, (saying): “Let them march at your flank!
“When the noise of the peoples in settlements becomes unbearable to you,
“And your temper drives you to decimate them,
“To ravage the black-headed and the wild beasts to destroy,
“Let these be your wrathful weapons, that they march at your flank!”.
They are furious, their weapons are raised,
They turn to Erra: “Rise! Stand up!
“Why, like a worn-out old man, do you reside in a city,
“Like a little child do you reside in a house?
“As one who knows not the (battle) field, will we eat the bread of women?
“As if we did not know how to fight, should we tremble and fear?
“Going to the (battle) field is becoming for manhood, like a festival!
“The city dweller, be he a prince, bread does not satiate him,
“Criticized by his own people, despised,
“He will have to beg to the humblest soldier.
“The city dweller, however mighty his strength,
“In what does it advantage the humblest soldier?
“The abundant bread of the city cannot compare with the cake baked in embers!
“The fine, honeyed beer cannot compare with the water from a waterskin!
“The palace on the citadel cannot compare with the shepherd’s hut!
“Warrior Erra, go out into the (battle) field, rattle your weapons!
“Make your noise loud, so that those above and below tremble!
“Let the Igigi hear it and extol your name!
“Let the Anunnaki hear it and fear the mention of you!
“Let the gods hear it and bend for your yoke!
“Let the kings hear it and kneel before you!
“Let the countries hear it and bring you their tribute!
“Let the demons hear it and die for themselves!
“Let the mighty one hear it and diminish his strength!
“Let the tall mountains hear it and @i{be destroyed}, and their summits be leveled!
“Let the rolling seas hear it and be troubled, and destroy (their) fauna!
“From the thickest forests let its trunks be uprooted!
“In the impenetrable reed-bed, let its reeds be snapped!
“May the peoples fear and their noise be quieted!
“Let the wild beasts shake and be brought to dust!
“May your fathers the gods regard and praise your heroism!
“Warrior Erra, why have you forsaken the (battle) field and reside in the city?
“The wild cattle and the wild beasts have despised us.
“Erra warrior, to you we address ourselves: Let our speech be unberable to you!
“Before the whole country belittles us,
“You must surely hear our advice!
“Do a kindness to the Anunnaki, who love silence:
“The Anunnaki, because of the noise of the people, are unable to fall asleep.
“The pastures – the source of life of the country – are trodden by cattle.
“The farmer, over @i{his land}, weeps bitterly.
“The lion and the wolf destroy the wild cattle.
“The shepherd, for his herd sleepless night and day, beseeches you,
“And we, who (once) knew the mountain passes, have forgotten every way.
“On our war-gear are spun cobwebs;
“Our precious bow offers resistance and has become too stiff for our strength,
“The tip of our sharp arrow is dulled,
“Our sword, for lack of bloodshed, is covered with rust.”
Warrior Erra heard them,
The words of the Seven pleased him like the finest of oils.
He prepared to speak, addressing Išum:
“Why, having heard this, are you sitting silent?
“Open the path, I shall take to the road!
“Let the Seven, the peerless warriors, make war!
“Make my fierce weapons march to my flank!
“And you, my champion, come before me!”.
[When] Išum [heard] these words,
Moved with compassion he said, [“alas!”]
“Warrior Erra, why have you devised insidious plots against the gods?
“You have plotted to ravage the earth and destroy [its inhabitants]; will you not desist?”
Erra prepared to speak,
Addressing Išum, his champion, in these words:
“Išum, pay attention, listen to my words!
“Concerning the peoples in settlements, whose pardon you requested,
“O champion of the gods, wise Išum, whose counsel is sweet!
“In heaven I am a wild bull, on earth I am a lion,
“In the land I am a king, among the gods a fury,
“Among the Igigi I am a hero, among the Anunnaki a champion,
“Among the beasts I am a bowhunter, in the mountain the pit-trap,
“In the reedbed I am the fire, in the forest the axe,
“In campaign I am the standard,
“As the wind I blow, as Adad I thunder;
“Like the sun god I oversee the whole orb.
“When I go forth into the field I am a wild goat;
“When I enter the steppe, as Nergal do I take residence.
“The gods all fear my name.
“And yet, the black-headed people despise me.
“I — for they have not feared my name
“And have neglected the orders of prince Marduk, I shall do as he pleases.
“I shall make prince Marduk angry, I shall raise him from his throne and devastate mankind.”
The warrior Erra set off to Šuʾanna, the city of the king of the gods,
He entered the Esagil, the palace of heaven and earth, and presented himself before him.
He prepared to speak, addressing the king of the gods:
“The image, the ornament of your lordship, which, like the stars of heaven, was full of splendor, why is it covered with filth?
“The diadem of your lordship, which used to make the Eḫalanki shine like the Etemenanki, why is it dimmed?
The king of the gods prepared to speak,
To Erra, the warrior of the gods, he addressed (his) word:
“Warrior Erra! Regarding that action you suggested:
“Once, in my anger, I arose from my throne, causing a flood;
“I arose from my residence, and the seams of heaven and earth were rent asunder.
“The heavens that were shaken: (for this cause,) the celestial bodies changed their positions, and I did not restore them to their places;
“The netherworld that trembled: (for this cause,) the (production) of the furrow decreased to such an extent that it was forever difficult to levy (taxes on it);
“The seams of heaven and earth that were rent asunder: the springs diminished and the floods receded. When I looked again, it was scarcely enough.
“The progeny of the living beings was scarce, but I did not restore things;
“Till, like a farmer, I took their seedlings in my hand.
“I built a(nother) house and settled therein.
“My image, which by reason of the deluge was removed, whose appearance was tarnished;
“I ordered the fire god to polish my face and cleanse my garments.
“When he had polished my image and fulfilled the action,
“And I had girded on the diadem of my lordship and returned to my place,
“My countenance was haughty, terrifying was my glance!
“The people that escaped the flood saw the action fulfilled:
“If I should now lift up my weapons, I would destroy the rest.
“Those craftsmen I brought down to the Apsû, and I have not yet decreed their return,
“I changed the location of the @i{mēsu}-tree (and its) amber, and revealed it to none.
“Now about that action you mentioned, O hero Erra!
“Where is the @i{mēsu}-tree, the flesh of the gods, fitting for the king of the universe?
“The pure tree, the splendid lad, which is meet for lordship;
“That in the waters of the vast sea spreads its roots a hundred double-hours to reach the depths of the Netherworld;
“Whose top in the heights touches the sky of Anu?
“Where is the pure blue pigment that was made (as) splendid (as) lapis lazuli?
“Where is Ninildu, master carpenter of my sovereignty?
“Bearer of the pure golden axe, skilled in the (carving of) that tree (@i{scil.} the @i{mēsu}-tree),
“Who makes (it) shine like the noonday and places (it) at my feet?
“Where is Kusibanda, the creator (of the images) of god and men, whose hands are choice?
“Where is Ninagal, the bearer of the upper and lower millstones,
“Who @i{molds} strong copper as (easily as) leather, the inventor of in[struments]?
“Where the choice pearls, the fruit of the vast sea, fitting for a diadem?
“Where the seven sages of the Apsû, pure carps, who like Ea their lord are perfect in their august wisdom, the purifiers of my body?
Warrior Erra heard him.
He prepared to speak, addressing prince Marduk:
“[…] … from the Apsû […] … to the heights.
“[The @i{mēsu}-tree, @i{which} …], I will cause its equal to ascend [...] the @i{mēsu}-tree,
“The pure amber, @i{which} […], I will cause its equal to ascend … […] … the amber.”
Marduk, hearing this,
Addressing warrior Erra, said to him:
“If I should rise up [from] my residence, the seams of heaven and earth would be torn asunder;
“The waters would rise and sweep away the land;
“They would turn a bright day into darkness;
“A storm would arise and [@i{cover}] the stars of the sky;
“An evil [wind] would arise and [@i{obscure}] the sight of the people, all living beings,
“The @i{gallû}-demons would ascend and seize [@i{mankind}];
“The unarmed man who confronts them […]
“The Anunnaki would ascend to the earth and ravage the living beings.
“[Until] I gird myself with my weapons, who will send them back?”
Erra, hearing this,
He prepared to speak, addressing prince Marduk:
“Prince Marduk, until you enter that house and the fire god purifies your garment and so return to your temple,
“Till that time I will assume command and strengthen the seams of heaven and earth.
“I will ascend to the sky to give orders to the Igigi,
“I will go down to the Apsû to inspect the Anunnaki.
“The fierce @i{gallû}-demons I will drive off to the Netherworld,
“I will oppose them my wrathful weapons.
“Of the evil wind – like a bird, I will bind its wings.
“When you enter that house, O prince Marduk,
“On the right and on the left of your door I will station Anu and Enlil like bulls.”
Prince Marduk heard it:
The words spoken by Erra pleased him.
